---
layout: page
title: Part 2 - Genome assembly
---

<!-- Updated by Alexis Gkantiragas, 2023 -->

# Part 2: Genome assembly

You need to have gone through [Part 1: Read cleaning](pt-1-read-cleaning.html)
before starting this practical.

# 1. Brief assembly example / concepts

Many different pieces of software exist for genome assembly. We will be using
[*SPAdes*](https://cab.spbu.ru/software/spades/).

Following the same procedure described in Section 1.2 of
[Part 1: Read cleaning](pt-1-read-cleaning.html), create a new main directory
for today's practical (e.g., `2023-09-27-assembly`), the `input`, `tmp`,
and `results` subdirectories, and the file `WHATIDID.txt` to log your
commands.  
Link the output (cleaned reads) from Part 1 practical into `input` subdirectory:

```bash
cd ~/2023-09-27-assembly
cd input
ln -s ~/2023-09-26-read_cleaning/results/reads.pe*.clean.fq .
cd ..
```

> **_Question:_**  
> * Did you note the use of `*` in the above command?
> * What does it do? (Hint: the symbol `*` is called 'globbing')

To assemble our cleaned reads with *SPAdes*, run the following line: 
(_This will take about 10 minutes_)

```bash
spades.py -o tmp -1 input/reads.pe1.clean.fq -2 input/reads.pe2.clean.fq
```

Like any other assembler, *SPAdes* creates many files, including a 
`scaffolds.fasta` file that is likely to be used for follow-up 
analyses.  
<!-- [.](../../data/reference_assembly/output/scaffolds.fasta.gz?raw=true).   -->
Copy this file to your `results` directory:

```bash
cp tmp/scaffolds.fasta results/
```

Take a look at the contents of this file (e.g., to see the first 10 lines, use 
`head results/scaffolds.fasta`, or `tail results/scaffolds.fasta` to see the
last 10 lines).

> **_Question:_**  
> Does it contain a lot of **NNNN** sequences? What do you think might be the
> reason for that? (Do not worry if your assembly does not contain any **NNNN**
> sequence.)

There are many other genome assembly approaches. While waiting for everyone to
make it to this stage, get an idea of some challenges associated to **_de novo_
genome assembly** and the approaches used to overcome them from the following 
papers:

 * [Genetic variation and the *de novo* assembly of human genomes. Chaisson et al 2015 NRG](https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg3933)
   (to overcome the paywall, login via your university, or email the authors).
 * The now slightly outdated (2013) [Assemblathon paper](http://gigascience.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2047-217X-2-10).
 * [Metassembler: merging and optimizing *de novo* genome assemblies. Wences & Schatz (2015)](http://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-015-0764-4).
 * [A hybrid approach for *de novo* human genome sequence assembly and phasing. Mostovoy et al (2016)](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3865).

# 2. Quality assessment

_How do we know if our genome is good?_

> "... the performance of different *de novo* genome assembly algorithms can 
> vary greatly on the same dataset, although it has been repeatedly demonstrated
> that no single assembler is optimal in every possible quality metric 
> [6, 7, 8]. The most widely used metrics for evaluating an assembly include 1)
> contiguity statistics such as scaffold and contig N50 size, 2) accuracy
> statistics such as the number of structural errors found when compared with an
> available reference genome (GAGE (Genome Assembly Gold Standard Evaluation)
> evaluation tool [8]), 3) presence of core eukaryotic genes (CEGMA (Core 
> Eukaryotic Genes Mapping Approach) [9]) or, if available, transcript mapping
> rates, and 4) the concordance of the sequence with remapped paired-end and
> mate-pair reads (REAPR (Recognizing Errors in Assemblies using Paired Reads) 
> [10], assembly validation [11], or assembly likelihood [12])." -  
> [Wences & Schatz (2015)](http://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-015-0764-4)

## 2.1 Simple metrics

An assembly software will generally provide some statistics about what it did.
But the output formats differ between assemblers. [*Quast*](http://quast.sourceforge.net/quast),
the _Quality Assessment Tool for Genome Assemblies_ is a tool designed to
generate a standardized report. Run *Quast* on the `scaffolds.fasta`
file without special options to get the basic statistics:

```bash
cd ~/2023-09-27-assembly/results
quast.py scaffolds.fasta
```

Have a look at the report (pdf or html) generated by *Quast* (copy the Quast's
output directory to `~/www/tmp` and access through your browser).

> **_Question:_**  
> * What do the values in the table mean?
> * For which values is higher better, and for which ones is smaller better?
> * Why does *Quast* use the word "contig"?

In some cases, we have prior knowledge about the expected percentage of **GC** 
content, the number of chromosomes, and the total genome size. These information
can be compared to the statistics present in Quast's report.

## 2.2 Biologically meaningful measures

Unfortunately, with many of the simple metrics, it is difficult to determine
whether the assembler did things correctly, or just haphazardly stuck lots of
reads together.

We probably have other prior information about what to expect in this genome.
For example:

 1. if we have a reference assembly from a not-too-distant relative, we can
    expect that large parts of genome will be organised in the same order, i.e., 
    _synteny_.
 2. If we independently created a transcriptome assembly, we can expect that
    the exons making each transcript will be mapped sequentially onto the 
    genome (see [TGNet](http://github.com/ksanao/TGNet) for an implementation).
 4. We can expect that the different scaffolds in the genome have a unimodal
    distribution in sequence read coverage. Similarly, we can expect that the
    percentage of **GC** content will be unimodally distributed among scaffolds.  
    Using this idea, the [Blobology](https://github.com/sujaikumar/assemblage)
    approach determined that evidence of foreign sequences in Tardigrades is
    largely due to extensive contamination rather than extensive horizontal gene
    transfer [Koutsovoulos et al 2016](http://www.pnas.org/content/113/18/5053).
 5. We can expect different patterns of gene content and structure between
    eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
 6. Pushing this idea further, we can expect a genome to contain a single copy
    of each of the "house-keeping" genes found in related species. This is 
    applied in *BUSCO* (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs).  
    Note that:
    * *BUSCO* is a refined, modernized implementation of [*CEGMA*]("http://korflab.ucdavis.edu/Datasets/cegma/") 
      (Core Eukaryotic Genes Mapping Approach). *CEGMA* examines a eukaryotic
      genome assembly for presence and completeness of 248 "core eukaryotic genes".
    * *Quast* also includes a "quick and dirty" method of finding genes.

It is *very important* to understand the concepts underlying these different 
approaches.

# 3. In your own time

Try to figure out what are the [tradeoffs between `de bruijn` graph and 
`overlap-layout-consensus` assembly approaches](https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg3367).
